Physical World

 .  WHAT IS PHYSICS ?
Humans have always been curious about the world around
them. The night sky with its bright celestial objects has
fascinated humans since time immemorial. The regular
repetitions of the day and night, the annual cycle of seasons,
the eclipses, the tides, the volcanoes, the rainbow have always
been a source of wonder. The world has an astonishing variety
of materials and a bewildering diversity of life and behaviour.
The inquiring and imaginative human mind has responded
to the wonder and awe of nature in different ways. One kind
of response from the earliest times has been to observe the
physical environment carefully, look for any meaningful
patterns and relations in natural phenomena, and build and
use new tools to interact with nature. This human endeavour
led, in course of time, to modern science and technology.
The word Science originates from the Latin verb Scientia
meaning ‘to know’. The Sanskrit word Vijñãn and the Arabic
word Ilm convey similar meaning, namely ‘knowledge’.
Science, in a broad sense, is as old as human species. The
early civilisations of Egypt, India, China, Greece, Mesopotamia
and many others made vital contributions to its progress.
From the sixteenth century onwards, great strides were made
in science in Europe. By the middle of the twentieth century,
science had become a truly international enterprise, with
many cultures and countries contributing to its rapid growth.
What is Science and what is the so-called Scientific
Method? Science is a systematic attempt to understand
natural phenomena in as much detail and depth as possible,
and use the knowledge so gained to predict, modify and
control phenomena. Science is exploring, experimenting and
predicting from what we see around us. The curiosity to learn
about the world, unravelling the secrets of nature is the first
step towards the discovery of science. The scientific method
involves several interconnected steps : Systematic
observations, controlled experiments, qualitative and